# Captions for Main Figures.

### Figure 1: Cluster Analysis and Phylogeny of Ligand groups.
###### A) Similarity-based clustering, using CLANS, of canonical chemokines and related molecules with sequence similarity. Canonical chemokines are an independent group from other related molecules (TAFA, CYTL and CXCL17). Canonical chemokines are composed of two large groups (CC-type and CXC-type) within which some divergent subgroups are highlighted. The clustering and connections shown are at the p-value threshold of 1E-6. Other p-values tested are shown in Supplementary Figure S1. Candidate invertebrate sequences are shown as crosses and further information regarding them can be found in Supplementary Results. B) Maximum-Likelihood un-rooted phylogenetic tree of canonical chemokines. CC-type and CXC-type are split into two separate clades. Supports for key nodes are indicated in boxes with Transferable Bootstrap Expectation (TBE) represented by triangles and the Ultrafast Bootstraps (UFB) as circles. A traffic light colour code is used to indicate the level of support: high (green); intermediate (yellow) and low (red). C) Similarity-based clustering, using CLANS, of the CKLF super family (CKLFSF). Two major clusters are formed: the smaller “CKLF Group I” and the heterogenous “CKLF group II” that also includes some invertebrate sequences (shown as crosses). Subclades, including the known members of the CKLF super family, are highlighted. The clustering and connections shown are at the p-value threshold of 1E-15, as this is the threshold at which the two major clusters connect. Other p-values tested are shown in Supplementary Figure S2. D) Maximum-Likelihood un-rooted phylogenetic tree of the CKLF super family (CKLFSF). The CKLF group I is monophyletic, while the CKLF group II is not.  Supports for key nodes are indicated in boxes with Transferable Bootstrap Expectation (TBE) represented by triangles and the Ultrafast Bootstraps (UFB) as circles. A traffic light colour code is used to indicate the level of support: high (green); intermediate (yellow) and low (red).

### Figure 2: Distribution and duplication patterns of ligand groups.
###### A) Presence of all ligand groups are mapped onto a species tree. Gene trees and duplication events are based on the gene tree to species tree reconciliation analyses. The nomenclature for canonical chemokines is primarily based on known chemokines of human (or mouse). Where human and mouse chemokines do not correspond, the default name refers to the human gene and the mouse (Mus musculus) one is indicated with “Mm”. Chemokines that have been classically described as having either homeostatic or inflammatory function are indicated with a circle or a star respectively. The classification used here was based on Zlotnik and Yoshie 2012 with the inflammatory type also including chemokines they described as plasma/platelet types. Overall, canonical chemokines originated in vertebrates and expanded a first time in jawed vertebrates and a second time in mammals. Homeostatic chemokines (e.g., CXCL12) are generally more ancient than inflammatory ones. CXCL17 and CYTL are mammal and jawed vertebrate specific respectively. TAFA originated in the common ancestor of vertebrates and urochordates, while the CKLF super family is present in invertebrates although key duplications occurred at the base of vertebrates. B) Number of complements for each ligand group at key species nodes are mapped onto the species tree. The number of complements in each group reflects the pattern of duplications. The major increase occurred at the level of jawed vertebrates with canonical chemokines undergoing a second significant increase within placentals.  
